Initial proposal for P/Invokes via Source Generators (#33742)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/features/source-generator-pinvokes.md

### Adoption of Source Generator for existing code

In the current Source Generator design modification of any user written code is not permitted. This includes modification of any non-functional metadata (e.g. Attributes). The above design therefore introduces a new attribute and signature for consumption of a native export. Therefore, in order to consume Source Generator's users would need to update their source and adoption could be stunted by this.

As a mitigation it would be possible to create a [Roslyn Analyzer and Code fix](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/wiki/Getting-Started-Writing-a-Custom-Analyzer-&-Code-Fix) to aid the developer in converting their `DllImportAttribute` marked functions to use `GeneratedDllImportAttribute`. Furthermore, the function would need to be updated to have the `partial` keyword and potentially the enclosing class.

## Proposed API

> Given the Source Generator restrictions and potential confusion about overloaded attribute usage, the new attribute merges the existing `DllImportAttribute` with `GeneratedDllImportAttribute`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the Source Generator restrictions and potential confusion about overloaded attribute usage, the new `GeneratedDllImportAttribute` attribute mirrors the existing `DllImportAttribute`.
```

        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.ExactSpelling"/>
        public bool ExactSpelling;

        /// <summary>
        /// Indicates whether unmanaged methods that have HRESULT or retval return values
        /// are directly translated or whether HRESULT or retval return values are automatically
        /// converted to exceptions.
        /// </summary>
        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.PreserveSig"/>
        public bool PreserveSig;

        /// <summary>
        /// Indicates whether the callee calls the SetLastError Windows API function before
        /// returning from the attributed method.
        /// </summary>
        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.SetLastError"/>
        public bool SetLastError;

        /// <summary>
        /// Enables or disables the throwing of an exception on an unmappable Unicode character
        /// that is converted to an ANSI "?" character.
        /// </summary>
        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.ThrowOnUnmappableChar"/>
        public bool ThrowOnUnmappableChar;
    }
}
```

## Questions

> * Can the above API be used to provide a reverse P/Invoke stub?

Reviewer: Today, reverse P/Invoke stubs are done via delegates. Inserting the marshaling stub for the delegate would not be easy (in most cases at least).

A good starting position may be that delegates are not supported with this, and need to switch to function pointers and NativeCallabable methods instead.

        /// Indicates whether the callee calls the SetLastError Windows API function before
        /// returning from the attributed method.
        /// </summary>
        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.SetLastError"/>
        public bool SetLastError;

        /// <summary>
        /// Enables or disables the throwing of an exception on an unmappable Unicode character
        /// that is converted to an ANSI "?" character.
        /// </summary>
        /// <see cref="System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.ThrowOnUnmappableChar"/>
        public bool ThrowOnUnmappableChar;
    }
}
```

## FAQs

* Can the above API be used to provide a reverse P/Invoke stub?

    * No. Reverse P/Invoke invocation is performed via a delegate and integrating this proposal would prove difficult. Alternative approach is to leverage the [`NativeCallableAttribute`](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/32462) feature.

* How will users get error messages during source generator?

    * The Source Generator API will be permitted to provide warnings and errors through the [Roslyn SDK](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/roslyn-sdk/).

> * Is it be possible to completely replicate the marshaling rules in the current built-in system using existing .NET APIs?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Will it be possible to completely replicate the marshaling rules in the current built-in system using existing .NET APIs?
```

>     * No. There are rules and semantics that would be difficult to replicate with the current .NET API surface. Additional .NET APIs will likely need to be added in order to allow a Source Generator implementation to provide identical semantics with the built-in system.

Reviewer 2: [This](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/33742#discussion_r395382954) example should be mentioned (not everybody reads every comment on PR, especially outdated comments).

* Debugging the auto-generated marshaling IL Stub is difficult for runtime developers and close to impossible for consumers of P/Invokes.

This is not to say the P/Invoke system should be completely redesigned. The current system is heavily used and its simplicity for consuming native assets is a benefit. Rather this new mechanism is designed to provide a way for marshaling code to be generated by an external tool but integrate with `DllImportAttribute` in a way that isn't onerous on current .NET developers.

The [Roslyn Compiler](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn) team is working on a [Source Generator feature][source_gen_link] that will allow the generation of additional source files that can be added to an assembly during the compilation process - the runtime generation IL Stubs is an in-memory version of this scenario.

**Note** This proposal is targeted at addressing P/Invoke improvements but could be adapted to work with COM interop utilizing the new [`ComWrappers`][comwrappers_link] API.

### Requirements

* [Source generators][source_gen_link]
  * Branch: https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/tree/features/source-generators

## Design

> Using Source Generators is focused on integrating with existing uses of `DllImportAttribute` from an invocation point of view (i.e. callsites should not need to be updated). The idea behind Source Generators is that code for some scenarios can be precomputed using user declared types and logic thus avoiding the need to generator code at runtime. The desire is then to provide a way that existing code can continue to function but can be modified in a way that allows it to leverage this new compiler feature.

Reviewer 3: > The desire is then to provide a way that existing code can continue to function but can be modified in a way that allows it to leverage this new compiler feature.

How do you envision exiting code continues working here while taking advantage of the newly generated code. The existing code is PInvoke which is an `extern` method. Is the idea that the runtime will change to forward the PInvoke stub to the generated helpers?

Reviewer 4: Well, ideally in my mind, for this situation, the user written function remains a valid function (for the purposes of reflection, etc), but the body of the function simply calls some other method that provides the implementation. I don't know if this is practical at all, but … you did ask. :)

Author: I believe this would be addressed with https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/3301

    * This process is also influenced by additional `DllImportAttribute` properties as well as by the underlying platform. For example, the [Win32 API ANSI/UNICODE convention](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/win32/intl/conventions-for-function-prototypes) on Windows is respected and a(n) `A`/`W` suffix may be appended to the function name if it is not immediately found.

4) The IL Stub is called like any other .NET method.

5) The IL Stub marshals arguments as appropriate and invokes the export via the `calli` instruction.

6) Once the export returns control to the IL Stub the marshaling logic cleans up and ensures any returned data is marshaled back out to the calling function.

### Source Generator Integration

An example of how the previous P/Invoke snippet could be transformed is below. This example is using the proposed API in this document. The Source Generator currently has a limitation that we will ignore at present - the inability to modify user written code. This limitation is ignored to present an optimal user experience, but will be discussed later in case the current limitation becomes a hard requirement.

`Program.cs` (Pre-generated code)

``` CSharp

> /* A */ [DllImportAttribute("Kernel32.dll")]

Reviewer 4: I don't like the idea that the code would have a use of DllImport attribute. It implies that this code might do something useful without the source generator attached. I'd much rather have the GeneratedDllImportAttribute have all of the various options that the source generator can handle. (Also by re-using DllImportAttribute, it requires that the initial implementation actually handle all of the capabilities of DllImport, or at least detect incorrect behaviors. That seems like a hard ask, and something that would drive a lot of unnecessary work to achieve an MVP.)

Author: >I don't like the idea that the code would have a use of DllImport attribute. It implies that this code might do something useful without the source generator attached. I'd much rather have the GeneratedDllImportAttribute have all of the various options that the source generator can handle.

I don't think that is an unreasonable perspective.

>That seems like a hard ask, and something that would drive a lot of unnecessary work to achieve an MVP.

Not sure I agree with this being apart of an MVP. MVPs don't technically require a bug free/comprehensive scenario state. Defining the supported path would be easy to define and stating the certain properties aren't considered at present would be enough for an MVP. The final product of course would warrant far more scrutiny.

Author: @davidwrighton I have adopted your feedback here and now the `GeneratedDllImportAttribute`  API will ideally have the same fields as `DllImportAttribute`. Pruning them is possible; suggestions are welcome.

/* D */ [GeneratedDllImportAttribute]
/* B */ extern static bool QueryPerformanceCounter(out long lpPerformanceCount);
...
long count;
/* C*/ QueryPerformanceCounter(out count);
```

Observe point (D), the new attribute. This attribute provides an indication to a Source Generator that the following declaration should be updated.

`Program.cs` (In-memory updated code)

``` CSharp
/* D */ [GeneratedDllImportAttribute]
/* B */ partial static bool QueryPerformanceCounter(out long lpPerformanceCount);
...
long count;
/* C */ QueryPerformanceCounter(out count);
```

> During the source generation process the `DllImportAttribute` (A) would be removed. The `GeneratedDllImportAttribute` (D) would remain to provide a metadata indication that the function was auto-generated. Also note that the method declaration has been updated and marked `partial`. The Source Generator would then generate the source for this partial method. The invocation (C) remains unchanged.

Reviewer 3: > Durring the source generation process the `DllImportAttribute` (A) would be removed.

Source generators do not allow for modification of existing source code.

Author: Agreed. This is mentioned in the premise for the associated section.

> 

Reviewer 4: There are several problematic points here.

1. I believe that the current plan for source generators will not allow modification of existing source.
2. partial methods must have the return type of void

We should bring this question to the C# language developers and see what they come up for how this should be notated in source.

Reviewer 5: CC. @jaredpar who should be able to ping the right people

Author: (1) I discuss further in the proposal.

(2) if unfortunate. I didn't realize that limitation with methods marked `partial`. I just read the doc. Hopefully the C# team can help here.

Reviewer 3: > I believe that the current plan for source generators will not allow modification of existing source.

+100

> partial methods must have the return type of void

That would require a change for sure but I don't think it's a deal breaker.

Author: > > I believe that the current plan for source generators will not allow modification of existing source.
> 
> +100

Yep. I hear that is and continues to be a goal. Please see the section on Source Generator constraint mitigation.

> > partial methods must have the return type of void
> 
> That would require a change for sure but I don't think it's a deal breaker.

This would be very helpful to understand what we could get away with here.

`Stubs.g.cs`:

``` CSharp
/* E */ partial static bool QueryPerformanceCounter(out long lpPerformanceCount)
{
    unsafe
    {
        long result = 0;
        bool success = QueryPerformanceCounter(&result) != 0;
        lpPerformanceCount = result;
        return success;
    }
}

[DllImportAttribute("Kernel32.dll")]
/* F */ private static extern int QueryPerformanceCounter(long* lpPerformanceCount);
```

The Source Generator would generate the implementation of the partial method (E) in a separate translation unit (`Stubs.g.cs`). At point (F) the `DllImportAttribute` declaration from the user's original declaration is copied into a private P/Invoke specifically for the generated code. The P/Invoke signature from the original declaration would be modified to contain only [blittable types][blittable_link] to ensure the JIT could inline the invocation. Finally note that the user's original function signature would remain in to avoid impacting existing callsites.

> In this system it is not defined how marshaling of specific types would be performed. The built-in runtime has complex rules for some types, and it is these rules that once shipped become the de facto standard - often times regardless if the behavior is a bug or not. The design here is not concerned with how the arguments go from a managed to unmanaged environment. With the IL Stub generation extracted from the runtime new type marshaling (e.g. `Span<T>`) could be introduced without requiring an corresponding update to the runtime itself. The `Span<T>` type is good example of a type that at present has no support for marshaling, but with Source Generators, users could update to the latest generator and have support without changing the runtime.

Reviewer 6: A few questions related to marshallers:
1. In this example, isn't an ILstub still being generated?  Is there a way to avoid that stub, or have it pre-generated?
2. Will stubs.g.cs be human writable?  If so, how?  
3. How would a new marshaller, like Span<T>, be introduced?  How do we envision adding them to our project?  (Nuget?)
4. What is the diagnostics experience if I use a type that is not supported by the source generator?  A build error?  An exception emited for runtime?  (eg. Trying Span<T> before such a marshaller is introduced)

Author: @jeffschwMSFT Here are my thoughts:

> 2. Will stubs.g.cs be human writable?  If so, how?

Sure. That is already possible since users can convert their non-blittable P/Invoke signature into a blittable one and instead implement a wrapper that does all the marshaling manually. There would be little need to do any generation if the signature only contain blittable types - at least that seems to be the tenor of the current thought.

> 3. How would a new marshaller, like Span, be introduced?  How do we envision adding them to our project?  (Nuget?)

That would be a design consideration for the default Source Generator supplied by the .NET team. If that source generator is extensible or not is entirely up to us. Third parties that want their own P/Invoke source generator would need to define their own mechanism to extensible marshaling. For the default, we would add support as types become interesting. `Span<T>` would of course be in the default as well as `Nullable<T>` and various others as the language continues to evolve, but we could add support and users could opt in without requiring a runtime update.

> 4. What is the diagnostics experience if I use a type that is not supported by the source generator?  A build error?  An exception emited for runtime?  (eg. Trying Span before such a marshaller is introduced)

That is an interesting question for the Source Generator team. @chsienki How is the Source Generator team thinking about propagation of source generator states? How does a Source Generator convey failures to the users?

Reviewer 7: Generators can produce diagnostics (much like an analyzer does today), which are presented to the user via the command line / IDE etc.

Author: Thanks @chsienki. @jeffschwMSFT Seems like any Source Generator for P/Invokes would be able to alert a user when a type is hit that can't be marshaled in a nice message. This could point to the classic P/Invoke mechanism when the Source Generator can't support the scenario and/or we point users to a repo to file an issue or guidance for how to manually work around support.

# Source Generator P/Invokes

## Purpose

The CLR possesses a rich built-in marshaling mechanism for interoperability with native code that is handled at runtime. This system was designed to free .NET developers from having to author complex and potentially ABI sensitive [type conversion code][typemarshal_link] from a managed to an unmanaged environment. The built-in system works with both [P/Invoke][pinvoke_link] (i.e. `DllImportAttribute`) and [COM interop](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/native-interop/cominterop). The generated portion is typically called an ["IL Stub"][il_stub_link] since the stub is generated by inserting IL instructions into a stream and then passing that stream to the JIT for compilation. 

> A consequence of this approach is that marshaling code is not immediately available post-link for AOT scenarios (e.g. [`crossgen`](../../workflow/building/coreclr/crossgen.md) and [`crossgen2`](crossgen2-compilation-structure-enhancements.md)). The immediate unavailability of this code has been mitigated by a complex mechanism to have marshalling code generated at AOT time.

Reviewer: You can also mention IL linker here. It is hard for the IL linker to see the dependencies of the interop marshalers.

  * Example involving COM marshaling: https://github.com/dotnet/coreclr/pull/23974.
* Debugging the auto-generated marshaling IL Stub is difficult for runtime developers and close to impossible for consumers of P/Invokes.

This is not to say the P/Invoke system should be completely redesigned. The current system is heavily used and its simplicity for consuming native assets is a benefit. Rather this new mechanism is designed to provide a way for marshaling code to be generated by an external tool but integrate with `DllImportAttribute` in a way that isn't onerous on current .NET developers.

The [Roslyn Compiler](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn) team is working on a [Source Generator feature][source_gen_link] that will allow the generation of additional source files that can be added to an assembly during the compilation process - the runtime generation IL Stubs is an in-memory version of this scenario.

**Note** This proposal is targeted at addressing P/Invoke improvements but could be adapted to work with COM interop utilizing the new [`ComWrappers`][comwrappers_link] API.

### Requirements

* [Source generators][source_gen_link]

>   * Branch: https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/tree/features/source-generators

Reviewer 5: Should this link to https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/features/source-generators/docs/features/source-generators.md instead?

Author: Sure.

## Design

> Using Source Generators is focused on integrating with existing uses of `DllImportAttribute` from an invocation point of view (i.e. callsites should not need to be updated). The idea behind Source Generators is that code for some scenarios can be precomputed using user declared types and logic thus avoiding the need to generator code at runtime. The desire is then to provide a way that existing code can continue to function but can be modified in a way that allows it to leverage this new compiler feature.

Reviewer 5: Is part of this proposal us providing an "official" source generator for this?

Author: Yes. It would be the default for P/Invokes. Probably consumable from a NuGet?

### P/Invoke Walkthrough

The P/Invoke algorithm is presented below using a simple example.

``` CSharp
/* A */ [DllImportAttribute("Kernel32.dll")]
/* B */ extern static bool QueryPerformanceCounter(out long lpPerformanceCount);
...
long count;
/* C */ QueryPerformanceCounter(out count);
```

At (A) in the above code snippet, the runtime is told to look for an export name `QueryPerformanceCounter` (B) in the `Kernel32.dll` binary. There are many additional attributes on the `DllImportAttribute` that help with export discovery and can influence the semantics of the generated IL Stub. Point (C) represents an invocation of the P/Invoke. Most of the work occurs at (C) at runtime, since (A) and (B) are merely declarations the compiler uses to embed the relevant details into assembly metadata that is read at runtime.

1) During invocation, the function declaration is determined to be an external call requiring marshaling. Given the defined properties in the `DllImportAttribute` instance as well as the metadata of the user-defined signature an IL Stub is generated.

>     * An IL Stub is always generated when an assembly is compiled in `Debug`. In `Release` builds it is possible no IL Stub is generated and instead the JIT will elide the stub and inline the invocation. We will come back to this inlining below.

Reviewer: This goes into CoreCLR implementation details. Not sure whether this helps the clarity. Skipping the IL stub generation is a historic shortcut that is not really required.

Conceptually, the IL stub is always generated. In Release builds, the JIT inlines the IL stub like any other method if it is profitable and possible.

2) The runtime attempts to find a binary with the name supplied in `DllImportAttribute`.

    * Discovery of the target binary is complicated and can be influenced by the [`AssemblyLoadContext`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.loader.assemblyloadcontext) and [`NativeLibrary`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.nativelibrary) classes.

3) Once the binary is found and loaded into the runtime, it is queried for the expected export name. The name of the attributed function is used by default but this is configurable by the [`DllImportAttribute.EntryPoint`](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.runtime.interopservices.dllimportattribute.entrypoint) property.

    * This process is also influenced by additional `DllImportAttribute` properties as well as by the underlying platform. For example, the [Win32 API ANSI/UNICODE convention](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/win32/intl/conventions-for-function-prototypes) on Windows is respected and a(n) `A`/`W` suffix may be appended to the function name if it is not immediately found.

> 4) The IL Stub is called like any .NET method, but the address of the export is passed to the generated IL Stub via a 'hidden' argument.

Reviewer: The hidden argument passed to the IL stub is MethodDesc, it is not the address of the export. I would drop this CoreCLR implementation detail from this doc - it is not important.

`Stubs.g.cs`:

``` CSharp
/* E */ partial static bool QueryPerformanceCounter(out long lpPerformanceCount)
{
    unsafe
    {
        long result = 0;
        bool success = QueryPerformanceCounter(&result) != 0;
        lpPerformanceCount = result;
        return success;
    }
}

[DllImportAttribute("Kernel32.dll")]
/* F */ private static extern int QueryPerformanceCounter(long* lpPerformanceCount);
```

The Source Generator would generate the implementation of the partial method (E) in a separate translation unit (`Stubs.g.cs`). At point (F) the `DllImportAttribute` declaration from the user's original declaration is copied into a private P/Invoke specifically for the generated code. The P/Invoke signature from the original declaration would be modified to contain only [blittable types][blittable_link] to ensure the JIT could inline the invocation. Finally note that the user's original function signature would remain in to avoid impacting existing callsites.

> In this system it is not defined how marshaling of specific types would be performed. The built-in runtime has complex rules for some types, and it is these rules that once shipped become the de facto standard - often times regardless if the behavior is a bug or not. The design here is not concerned with how the arguments go from a managed to unmanaged environment.

Reviewer: Some of the existing marshaling rules cannot be replicated using public APIs, e.g. even the common ones like SetLastError. For the end-to-end plan to work, we will need to add new public APIs to make the marshaler generation possible.

Reviewer 5: Does this mean that invoking a function pointer *could* still mutate `GetLastError`? Is that because, for example, the GC could run?

Reviewer: Raw PInvoke used to mutate GetLastError in .NET Framework in some cases. It is not the case in .NET Core.

GC suspension saves/restored GetLastError, so it won't alter it either.

The problem I was pointing at is that you cannot set the value returned by `Marshal.GetLastWin32Error` today via public APIs today in reasonable way.

Author: Added comment in FAQ about this topic.

> In this system it is not defined how marshaling of specific types would be performed. The built-in runtime has complex rules for some types, and it is these rules that once shipped become the de facto standard - often times regardless if the behavior is a bug or not. The design here is not concerned with how the arguments go from a managed to unmanaged environment.

Reviewer: It may be useful to give examples of new types of marshaling rules that this will enable.

* In-memory source modification - This would yield the ideal design above.

* On disk source modification - Altering source on disk would require the `GenerateNativeImportAttribute` to contain all properties from `DllImportAttribute`. This is required since removing the `DllImportAttribute` would be impossible and thus would cause issues during build since the method must also be marked as `partial`.

* No source modification - This aligns with the current Source Generator constraints. It would be possible to create a [Roslyn Analyzer and Code fix](https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/wiki/Getting-Started-Writing-a-Custom-Analyzer-&-Code-Fix) to aid the developer in converting their `DllImportAttribute` marked functions to use `GenerateNativeImportAttribute`. Furthermore, the function would need to be updated to have the `partial` keyword and potentially the enclosing class.

## Proposed APIs

> The ideal solution with support for minor user defined source updates using Source Generators:

Reviewer: I think that the ideal solution would be to just enable the source generator at the .csproj level. Adding the `GenerateNativeImportAttribute` to every DllImport is unnecessary ceremony. Why would somebody want to mark some PInvokes in the project with this, but not others?

Author: Off the top of my head, bugs. Having a simple way to target which functions is useful for experimentation and testing. I am not against having some property that just does it, but I would prefer to keep it a bit manual until we understand how people plan to use it.

Reviewer: If it is to workaround bugs, the attribute should be opt-out (e.g. tell the generator to not touch it).

Reviewer 5: Having it be opt-out would be dependent on in place source generate updates, right?

Reviewer: Right. Any design that keeps DllImportAttribute as is would depend on source generators being able to do targeted updates of the program.

Author: I think this is a further potential optimization. I don't see the need to include it at present, unless the statement in the proposal of "ideal solution" is the concern.

I personally don't think that source generators going in and updating things without attributes is a good idea. I get the argument for reduced metadata, but that is easy to handle using the IL Linker. I don't like the idea of properties in a project file that magically convert things in my code. Let the code do the talking, not some build property.

Reviewer 5: It would also be fairly trivial to extend the attribute to support `Assembly`, `Class`, or `Struct`, in which case you could annotate less while still getting the opt-in benefits.

Author: Oh that is interesting. I hadn't thought of that. I think that would have to be the scenario with in-memory source updates right?

Reviewer 5: Right, I believe so, as the actual `DllImport` needs to not be the version using `out` and `bool`, etc.

Reviewer: BTW: The problem with the updates can be solved by a trivial https://github.com/Fody/Fody plugin that hooks up the source-generated implementation.

I am not proposing the IL rewriters as the right solution, but I believe that community projects out there will tend to resort to trivial IL rewriters if source generators do not provide the right tools for hooking up the source-generated implementation.

Author: >I am not proposing the IL rewriters as the right solution, but I believe that community projects out there will tend to resort to trivial IL rewriters if source generators do not provide the right tools for hooking up the source-generated implementations.

I don't think the community should have to rely on any additional tooling other than source generators. In fact this approach would be a failure in my opinion if that isn't possible. We need to language to be able to do this. With the original proposal here this wasn't an issue. Do we think it will be possible to address with this current approach?

Reviewer 5: > I don't think the community should have to rely on any additional tooling other than source generators. In fact this approach would be a failure in my opinion if that isn't possible. We need to language to be able to do this. With the original proposal here this wasn't an issue. Do we think it will be possible to address with this current approach?

At least given the design doc in https://github.com/dotnet/roslyn/blob/features/source-generators/docs/features/source-generators.md, the existence of tooling like `ClangSharpPInvokeGenerator`, and the current state of P/Invoke support in .NET...

I'm not sure I would have much use for this proposal in particular, but I can see where it or something similar would be useful for some people.

For my personal projects, I was just planning on migrating my current infrastructure, which uses the existing tooling to generate blittable P/Invokes, from a manual process (must manually regenerate sources) to an automated process (it uses source generators and up-to-date checks, with the generated files being deterministic and checked in).

You can see an example of where I use `ClangSharp` and an `rsp` file to generate bindings for D2D1 today here: https://github.com/terrafx/terrafx.interop.windows/blob/master/generation/um/d2d1/generate.rsp, which generates all of https://github.com/terrafx/terrafx.interop.windows/tree/master/sources/Interop/D2D1/um/d2d1. You can also see examples of much of the rest of DirectX in neighboring files, and this extends to Vulkan, X11, Wayland, and others for other repos I have.

I've customized it to take one or more header files (generally just one) as inputs and to generate a file per type, with all generated types being `partial` so you can easily extend or customize functionality where needed.

Automatically generating "safe" APIs above this is hard, because given just a C/C++ header file, it is basically impossible to know if a given `T*` is a scalar pointer, an array, an output buffer, an input buffer, etc. So that has been mostly a manual process and I would believe requires a different type of proposal/source generator to accomplish automatically.

Author: @tannergooding Starting from a C/C++ header is a much different issue here though. I agree that will require some additional tooling. The idea here is P/Invoke stubs being created in an AOT friendly way. The complete round trip is much hard as mentioned.

Reviewer 5: Right, I was basically trying to say that this will likely be useful for people who already have P/Invoke signatures which are not blittable (they would have stubs generated for usages of `bool`, `char`, `ref`, `out`, `in`, and `T[]` or similar), but that it might require creative thinking to make work given the currently proposed source generator semantics.

Other people are generating bindings automatically from C/C++ headers and this likely wouldn't apply to them.

One way it could work with the existing semantics is to just have the desired public signatures (the ones taking `out` and such) in some shim-class that isn't actually used (or maybe as a `cs` input file that isn't part of the compilation?) in which case you don't need to worry about overwriting existing signatures/code.

Reviewer: > I don't think the community should have to rely on any additional tooling other than source generators. In fact this approach would be a failure in my opinion if that isn't possible. 

+1

> With the original proposal here this wasn't an issue.

The original proposal required reflection at runtime. The point of the source generators is to shift reflection and other expensive stuff from runtime to compile time. If you have to use reflection at runtime to use source generators effectively, it would be also a failure.

Author: >The original proposal required reflection at runtime. The point of the source generators is to shift reflection and other expensive stuff from runtime to compile time. If you have to use reflection at runtime to use source generators effectively, it would be also a failure.

I agree with that in principle. In the ideal end result all of this would align and language features would exist to make the scenario work and no reflection would be needed. We would also be able to use function pointers since that seems to be the most direct method to invoke an export - please correct me here.

All that aside, I would like to understand how much latitude we want tolerate in order to reach the above ideal. My starting premise in this design proposal is stated as:

> The desire is then to provide a way that existing code can continue to function but can be modified in a way that allows it to leverage this new compiler feature.

If this isn't how we should be thinking about this, I would like to ensure we have our Goals and Non-Goals defined. I will work on updating this proposal with those so we all can agree on what is and isn't important.

Reviewer: > Goals

- Allow PInvoke interop evolution independently on runtime
- High performance: No reflection at runtime, naturally AOTable

> Non-Goals 

- 100% parity with existing PInvoke marshaling rules (number of existing marshalers are used very rarely). This is what the 

> The desire is then to provide a way that existing code can continue to function but can be modified in a way that allows it to leverage this new compiler feature.

We need to meet in the middle on this: The goal for source generators should be to make this feature successful. And the goal for this feature should be to use source generators.

> We would also be able to use function pointers since that seems to be the most direct method to invoke an export - please correct me here.

I do not think the function pointers should be at the center of this feature. The most direct, the most performant and the most secure way to invoke an export is via the OS supplied import/export mechanism. This assumes AOT - Mono/Xamarin and CoreRT have this option. The current DllImport makes it possible with the right flags (`ExactSpelling=true`). If you make function pointers to be at the core part of this feature, this is not longer possible.

``` CSharp
namespace System.Runtime.InteropServices
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Attribute used to indicate a Source Generator should create a function for marshaling
    /// arguments instead of relying on the CLR to generate an IL Stub at runtime.
    /// </summary>
    [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = false, Inherited = false)]
    public sealed class GenerateNativeImportAttribute : Attribute
    {
    }
}
```

An alternative solution that merges the existing `DllImportAttribute` with the `GenerateNativeImportAttribute`. This option would be used if user source cannot be modified in any manner.

``` CSharp
namespace System.Runtime.InteropServices
{
    /// <summary>
    /// Attribute used to indicate a Source Generator should create a function for marshaling
    /// arguments instead of relying on the CLR to generate an IL Stub at runtime.
    /// </summary>
    [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Method, AllowMultiple = false, Inherited = false)]

>     public sealed class GenerateNativeImportAttribute : Attribute

Reviewer: I think that this name should as similer to `DllImportAttribute` as possible, e.g.  `GeneratedDllImportAttribute`.

Author: Sure.
